So welcome to Governance and Administration.
We have till five minutes past two with you this
afternoon in your roles as Public Service and Digitizing
Government Minister.
If you want to start with a short intro, then I will
hand over to you and then open up for questions.
Well, thank you, Madam Chair, and I just want to start by,
modding,
Sharon Roche, the
Public Service Commissioner, and the various colleagues that we have
across
background
for coming along. Thank the committee for its work and,
look,
and for those tuning in,
globally, to this live broadcast.
What we're doing here is we've got the budget announced a couple of weeks
ago, where we're--
It's worth just remembering that, notwithstanding
how many savings that have been made in that budget, we're still running a deficit
of about over $11 billion in the year going forward, which
is an unsustainable situation for our country, and that's why we've
got a trajectory down to, back to surplus in two or three
years,
so that we're not asking the future generations to pay for what we're doing.
And a big part of that
is ensuring that our public service is efficient
in what it does. And
we had a period where there was a
big increase in spending
on the core public service and a whole lot of other things across government.
Big increase in hiring.
And so we've indicated as part of the budget that we want to,
return some of those figures. So there was 47,000
core public servants in 2017. When we came back six
years later into government, that number had gone
to sixty-three. It was still rising and, soon after we
were in office, it crested at 64, 65.
And that was an unsustainable increase, frankly.
And we've set a goal of restore-- returning that back to 55,000, which is
more in line with historic averages, around 1% of the population.
So,
that's an important part of what we're doing.
We're also looking for efficiencies across the public
sector. In the meantime,
at the same time, we're very determined.
New Zealand, I think, can be rightfully proud of its overall
democratic and public service setup.
Public service satisfaction levels, actually,
according to the Kiwi's count results, eight out of 10
people were satisfied with their most recent interaction with the public service.
So I think there's much that we can be proud of and build on.
Also, we still have challenges, particularly in the digital space.
And obviously, there's been a lot of interest in the last day or
two around one example of that.
So,
we-- I think the next few years are a period where we'll be
looking for improved efficiencies.
We'll be looking for the use of new technology to deliver
better outcomes for New Zealanders, which is what we're all on about.
Solving some of the problems that we've struggled to deal with over many decades.
But also, harnessing the power of technology to make it
easier for people to interact with the government and get on with their lives, and
get answers to the questions that they're looking for.
So that's by way of introduction.
Thank you.
And happy to answer any questions on these topics.
Thank you. And I've already got a list started, and the first person on that list
is Camilla Belich.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you,
Minister. I just have a question around your overall
stewardship of these public service cuts that
have been announced in the budget.
There seems to be, from the questions that we've been able to ask
prior to this hearing, through written questions and pre-hearing questions, that
no analysis has taken place as to what
jobs would be cut as a result of your decision
to decrease the public service workforce.
So I want to ask you what services and what
functions that the New Zealand Public Service is currently undertaking will
not be undertaken as a result of these cuts that you have
made overall to the public.
Well, I suppose an interesting start-- place to start was I'd be interested to
see the analysis and, research that was done
before the previous government determined to massively increase the size of the
public service and go on a hiring spree over a period of three to five years.
This is about your budget.
And so, what we inherited was, a greatly
expanded
volume of people working in the public service.
Big increase from, like I say, 47,000, way up to
63, 64, depending on the time that you count.
And so,
we didn't need to do a detailed analysis
of particular issues. What we needed to say was,
broadly speaking, how has the country managed these things over a
long period of time? And a good place to start would be get-- to get back
to that historic average, and that would take us back to about
55,000. Now, the individual ministries
that we might be dealing with-
Are then given the task of
asking, how can you make that work?
And I've got every confidence, because most of those ministries could
make it work in 2017 with far fewer workers delivering a good service,
and they can do it again
if we give them the right encouragement and guidance.
So the answer to that question is that you don't know what services and what
jobs will be cut as a result of these.
Well, it's not that I don't know, it's just, that is-
Well, what is the answer then?
Well, that will be worked through by each individual chief executive in
each department over the next few months.
And I've got every confidence they'll be able to do that.
I don't know whether the commissioner wants to add anything on that.
Yeah, that's correct. The government's been very clear on its targets.
Chief executives are working through how to give effect to those, and those
decisions will be made by cabinet in the next three to four months.
You got another sup?
Um-
Because I've got Fran. So Fran, sup.
That 1%, that's based on the historical average of
the public service, right? But that's only been since the 1990s, is
that correct?
Well,
if you want to go back to the 1850s, it might be relevant,
but not necessarily.
I'm talking of modern times.
Sure.
And one of the things that the Prime Minister has held as an example
of the public service that we should be aspiring to is Singapore.
Do you agree with that?
Yes, he refers to Singapore from time to time.
Are you aware that Singapore's percentage of the core public service as a
percentage of the population is actually 1.4%?
Well, that may well be the case, but, what is the point you're making?
Well, the point is that 1% is an arbitrary target.
If we're actually wanting to have a Singaporean-style public service, perhaps we
should start by emulating what they're actually doing on the ground there.
Well, I'm sure if the Greens had an opportunity, it would be 2%.
But that's very much-
Let's hope.
But yes, very much the approach.
There we go. That's Green policy.
Do I hear 2.5?
So,
yes, look, I think
the simple point that we are making, and I think it's one that most New Zealanders
can understand, is
as a country over an extended period of time,
we've been able to manage with a public service of a particular
size.
And
if over a period of six years of a labor government it massively increased,
which was obvious to everybody-
Huge
... the public went up by around 30%.
Then
at the same time, by the way, that
spending on consultants massively increased as well.
So not only were they hiring many more people, they were also
maxing the credit card on consultants at the same time.
And outcomes in terms of attendance at school and
accessibility to justice, a whole bunch of things were getting worse.
Then we've got to do something differently.
And so that's why this government is determined to bring some
focus and efficiency back to the broader system.
Final sup.
Final sup, yeah.
And final question. To myself, supplementary question.
Will you make the same promise that the then Minister of Public Services did-
Oh
... to not cut any frontline services?
Yes, our focus is not on frontline services.
And
so, this doesn't relate to police, and people
such as that.
But there are, of course, broader discussions about how we can do things more
efficiently in a whole host of areas.
But our focus is particularly on the
administrative side and looking for opportunities.
Which is not to denigrate the work of the
administrators in our government department.
I'm not one that believes that only frontline services
are worthy. It is just more a question of the fact that
if you're dealing with
particularly
finance, HR, and all those various capacities of property
administration that support public services.
There are real opportunities between government departments to work
together more effectively to get better results,
and that is the starting point.
Okay. I've got a sup from Tim and then one from Camilla.
Thank you. In the context of the questions that have been asked about
public service workforce numbers
dating back to the 1990s,
I just want to make sure I understand.
So the target number, which you've said is roughly 55,000, which is the
long-term average.
Mm-hmm.
How does that put us relative to where it was, say, at the start of the last
government, 2017, 2018? Is that a cut from there?
Yeah, broadly in the same category.
Category.
47,000. There's been a significant increase in population since 2017,
and 55 is broadly in that sort of category.
Okay, so it's more public servants, but it's similar percentage.
Yes.
And so there was obviously a big spike in the number of public servants, though,
during that term-
Yes
... that government.
Of all the new services that those new public servants provided,
because the question was what services are being cut, I assume that massive spike,
18,000 new public servants, 40% increase, came with
a 40% increase in services that were provided.
Are those on the chopping block?
Sadly, that wasn't the case.
And so,
the government of the day through budgets decided to do some
extra things which needed extra people to deliver them.
But it can't always just be a ratchet, where you just keep
on going only over one way, going up.
Because ultimately,
it has to be paid for. And, I started with the context, and the context
is notwithstanding the
Savings that we've made already as a government in the last two years, we're still
borrowing $11 billion in this year.
So we still have a real job to do as a country, to live within our
means. And that's why-- It would be great to turn up
here as the minister, and obviously, I'm the arts minister, and two days ago
turned up to select committee. It would be great to come in with a big
surplus under my belt and be able to spend lots of money, and that would make life
very easy as
a minister. But it's not something I've ever experienced.
When we tend to come into government as a center-right
government, we always come in facing very significant deficits and a real job to
do to turn that around. So that's what we're doing.
And so, one part of that
broader exercise is ensuring that our core public service is
back down to
historic levels.
Sup from Camilla.
Minister, you said that this wouldn't be affecting frontline
services, but your own budget documents state that although
the baseline reductions will exclude ōranga tamariki, law and order, health,
education, defense, and intelligence services.
In the footnote, it states
that those core public service departments will still be part of the reduction
of full-time equivalence. So what frontline roles
are safe from these budget cuts?
Well,
that'll be something that each chief executive will work through because every
government department has
a mix of frontline services and
back office. And the distinction between the two is not
always perfectly clear cut.
And so they'll be working their way through it with a goal of reducing the
overall head count. And I've got every confidence they'll be
able to do that. And of course, our starting proposition
is
that we want to continue to improve services
to New Zealanders,
in all the various areas that we deal with.
And we're confident and some people say, "Well, how can you
possibly do that with fewer people?" And that is the very
essence of productivity improvements, which is what we desperately need
as a country. And so
doing things better,
through skill, through the use of technology, through the way
that we structure things a- as a government.
We've inherited, what is it, 39 government departments.
It's not set in stone that we have to have it that way, each in a little
silo doing their own things.
We can look at those structures, and
we're very confident there will be better ways of doing things.
So, that's the broad challenge that they face.
So I'm not going to have an endless argument about this
person here and that person there and who's going to happen there, because that's
the process that we're going through over the next three months.
But we're very confident that the outcome will be good.
But you said a few minutes ago that this would not affect frontline
services.
Mm-hmm.
So that was incorrect, wasn't it?
No, it's not incorrect.
From what you've just said.
No, it's not incorrect because-
Because you can't name a single frontline service that is going to be safe from
these cuts.
Well, we've already outlined that we won't be making changes to
police numbers, for example-
But what is considered law and order in your budget document?
Well,
there is very large departments,
in all those areas, in justice and corrections and so forth, who all got very
large
administrative functions and offices that can be included in all
this.
So you guarantee there'll be no reduction in police officer numbers?
Well, the actual-
That's one area that you can-
The police officers have been excluded from this. Yes, absolutely.
Okay, and final sup from Andy.
Yeah, just wanted to-- So we've gone up from 47
to 64, 65-ish.
Yep.
Aiming to be back at 55. Where are we at at the moment
as the first-
We're at about 63, something like that.
63, so which-
And it just emphasizes the diff- difficulty of the task.
Yeah.
Of course, we've made some
reductions, but at the same time we've been increasing, particularly, some of our
frontline services in the last two years, such as corrections officers
and police. Well, police are not included in the count, but corrections officers
are.
So
there's been some reduction, but also some expansion.
Yeah. And look, my other area of question related to that, because there's been a
number of questions here, which were asked about what loss of
service has there been as a result of the
cut of 2,000 so far.
But are we measuring the services that we expect well enough?
This is probably a cross-system question.
Are we measuring the
quality of the services that are delivered by the state sector as a whole-
Well-
... well enough-
Yeah
... so as we can actually say, "Actually, no, they've got better here, here, here,
here, and here."
Well-
"And these are the numbers to show it."
Yeah. Well, of course, the government has some core
targets-
I'm aware of those
... that it set, which we're making excellent progress on.
And one I can point to is attendance at school, which
is a fundamental thing that you would think if you've got lots of extra people,
you'd get better outcomes in terms of some basics.
Remember, this is a government that's about fixing the basics and building the
future. One of the most basic things to do is ensure that kids are at school.
And we had a huge increase in people working for the Ministry of Education,
and
we were going backwards on attendance.
Since then, we've managed to turn that around significantly. That's one.
Immunization rates, one dear to the-
So-
... hearts of my colleagues, is another one.
So I could-
So I'm aware of those, really. They're the big ones.
But there's a lot of government-
Well, it's worth repetition.
There's a lot of government agencies which aren't directly contributing to those
big ones, or don't appear to be directly contributing.
They will all have some form of outcome measures.
Yeah.
My question really is, are those measures clear enough to show us actually what
we're getting for the money that is invested in them, and are they clear
enough also to show that we are making progress or not making progress as a result
of any changes that are being made?
Uh-
For those agencies.
Well, that, of course, is part of the-
Uh, a very function of this committee and other committees in terms of the
annual reporting and each department and Crown entity
has performance measures. I personally think there's room for
improvement in a number of them, but they're pretty useful devices.
But I don't know if the commissioner wanted to comment on that.
Yeah, look, and Auditor-General's on public record, I think some
of the measurement of outcomes, there's room for improvement.
Agree with the minister, but if we look at the anecdotal evidence, based
on our research, people are happy with the services they receive.
That does not mean we couldn't improve.
Okay. Harmry now from Fact.
Yeah, thank you.
In February, the then Chief Digital Officer, Paul James, said that
because they didn't have evidence about what could be achieved from
AI in the public service, that it was very hard to
forecast how much it would save.
What's changed since then that has given the government confidence to bank around
$2.4 billion of savings from essentially
replacing public service workers with AI?
Well, so I don't like to be unkind, but
your question grossly misunderstands the government
position and misrepresents it. We're not saying that
all the savings and all the staff reductions
are simply a function of being replaced by AI.
That's one element. The use of technology in the broader sense is one element.
Another element would be the structure of the public service
and sharing services more effectively.
One of the big challenges we have across public services is sharing
information between agencies,
and
that causes a whole lot of
problems for the customers, but also for the government in delivering
better outcomes,
and takes up an enormous amount of resource and time dealing with that.
And so,
being better at doing that, for example, is one way that we can get
better outcomes as well. So,
I think
most people can intuitively understand
that we are
living through
a revolution in terms of technology,
and
we're still in the middle of it. We don't know where it's going to end, and
it'll continue to evolve over the
next few years. But the ability
to
use technology, and
AI, and the various agents available
to solve problems that were
just overwhelming,
such as, just to give one example,
there's all these different legacy
information systems and data collections across government.
And if you're trying to create
new ones, it's a massive challenge at every turn.
The latest AI models can
get all that information from all these different systems and put it together and
solve problems in a much more efficient way than
having to recreate all the systems on their own.
So I think there is huge opportunities.
It's very exciting, and we want to make sure that
New Zealand is
making the most of it, and particularly our public servant is making the most of
it. I
beg the goodwill of the Chair, just going on a little bit long here, but
one of the observations I often make is if you
talk to the chief executive of
a private sector communications company, for example, one of
our telcos, and ask them what are they most worried about,
and I've had those conversations, they've said, well, AI.
And I say, well, what are you worried about?
I'm worried, actually, that my competitors will figure out how to use
this technology before I do or more quickly than I do, and I will
lose competitiveness and go broke.
Obviously, we don't have that dynamic- ...
in the public service because the IRD doesn't have competition
for its tax collecting. But so
our challenge, our technical challenge as a government is how do we get that level
of urgency in adopting the new technology that's
available.
All right. Thank you, Chair, and thank you, Minister.
You've asserted that $2.4 billion will come from
AI. Can you tell me what percentage of that $2.4 billion
will come from the use of AI?
No.
We didn't
come up and say we're going to get $750 from here and $1,000 from
here.
What was said is an overall expectation of savings through
efficiency, and as I said, there's a combination of elements that will lead to
that, but we haven't
divided it up by one and the other.
Right. So you don't actually have any evidence that the greater uptake of AI will
then lead to the savings that you've forecast?
Well,
I think the evidence is all around us in terms of what's going on in the
rest of the world and the globe in terms of people making use of new
technology, and our expectation is that the New Zealand Public Service will,
as everybody else's, and that will provide some opportunities.
But not on its own, but as part of much broader efforts that we're
engaging in.
Minister, I appreciate you say that the evidence is out there, but you've not
given any assurance that you've actually found a single
saving from AI. So you can appreciate why we're a little bit cynical on this side,
right?
Well,
the commissioner might have a couple of examples, you want to?
AI is just part of the solution. I think, first the
$2.4 billion is a treasury number, but we stand behind the
opportunity that by
reducing the number of agencies-
By simplifying our processes, by getting rid of duplication, we have
got good evidence that there are savings to be made with no
reduction in quality or productivity.
AI will actually help us, but it's not the only
thing.
Right. But let me then be explicit as my-
Absolutely
... final supplementary.
But there's not currently a single dollar that's been forecast as a
result of savings in AI as part of the budget that's been backed in,
independently, just AI. It's part of-
Well, as I've said,
it's part of a number of things that we'll be doing in order to realize
savings.
Right. Melissa? Ah, thank you.
Since we're talking about AI and technology, I just want to talk about the
biggest new appropriation, which is the $50.1 million
for the new Government Digital Delivery Agency.
It's earmarked specifically for delivering and regulating digital
services for New Zealanders. How do you actually see that
agency, GDDA, transforming the public
sector?
Well,
of course, that's a new
sum for the Public Service Commission that's been transferred across from
where it was before, in DIA.
And,
so
look, the opportunity is ... And I
think people will be conscious of this, in terms of
we've got 37 or 39 different government departments.
There has been a tendency over the years for
everyone doing their own thing,
and when it comes to procurement of IT technology.
And in terms of capital expenditure and ongoing expenditure, it is a
very significant part of government spending.
And
we can point to some excellent examples where it's gone well.
And we often hear of the IRD transformation project.
Our company's office does a ... They've done a very
successful digitization program.
You can point to Landonline and all the cadastral maps and things, which has
gone extremely smoothly.
People, when they arrive offshore, they don't have to fill out the handwritten
domestic cards. So that's been done online, and that's gone well and smoothly.
So
we can point to some successful examples.
Unfortunately, we can also point to some- ...
less successful examples.
Yes.
He's being very polite.
Going back a long way. And so,
as well as the big failures,
I think there's also just a more
broad
gap between modern expectations about what is possible with
technology, and what we're actually seeing.
And just in simple terms of New Zealanders having to give their basic information
time and time again over to different groups,
and repeat themselves. So, the purpose of the
GDDA is to
get some
greater discipline and consistency across the public service in terms of
investment, some interoperability to insist upon it not going off
in different directions.
And
also helping with the overall procurement.
Now,
and it's obviously just been moved into the public service six months ago.
And we've very high hopes and aspirations for it being an
increasingly significant and successful part of the broader government sector.
I don't know whether you wanted to add anything there. Yeah.
The GDDA coming into the Public Service Commission reflects
the fact that we believe
a more rapid adoption of technology is key to us being
able to meet the performance targets that New Zealanders can legitimately
expect. I think it's been a really positive move.
We need a much stronger center, and GDDA will be that center,
and some decision rights have been taken from individual
departments back. And we need, I think that also is a
positive sign that we need to think more about systems from
a system perspective in the services to taxpayers as opposed to
an individual silo.
Supplementary on that.
With that said, the government Chief Digital Officer has always been
the chief executive of DIA.
That now transfers to you now as the
functional chief executive of the GDDA.
How do you think that role,
the impact, or that role actually has on the
digital space for government and
is it likely to improve? What do you actually see the role
now? How do you see the role now?
Unequivocally will improve. The commissioner
sets a lot of the standards, sets the example
across the system. So it's not going to be forever,
but actually it reflects the transition as it comes into the
commission. We do need a reset of GDDA, as the minister
said.
Ultimately, we'll have to go through some form of
what is the steady state for that. The next few months are really important for
us as we prepare to give effect to the government's
objectives around a better public service.
So it will be closely linked to me in the meantime.
I want to move to Camilla because she's moving out shortly, so she's got
a primary-
I've got a question around the Public Service Commission.
So we've talked about the overall budget reductions that you've had and the
different roles. But we have an example here with the Public Service
Commission, in terms of their
particular
reductions that they're having in the budget.
So in response to written questions, the commission
stated that they will face a financial
sustainability risk arising from the savings of
2%, 5%, and then a further 5% in '28, '29
And also that it may affect the commission's ability to
sustain delivery and lead system improvement.
So that's an example, as you said, of
a commission, a government agency that is reducing or looking to
reduce
what they do as a result of these budget cuts.
And you can see that even though in this budget,
and in
the decisions that the government has recently made, the Public Service Commission
has been asked to do more. They are saying that because of these budget
cuts, they will
probably not be able to do their current role.
So in terms of that example, Minister, does that mean that
the entire 2.4 billion of
savings is just a fantasy and that New
Zealanders are going to face either a
significant
failure in that to reduce the budget to meet your
surplus
target, or they're going to face significant
reduction in the
services that the public service currently provides?
Well, no.
Those savings we will be capturing,
unlike your friend and predecessor, Grant
Robertson, who used to promise-
We're not talking about the last government.
Well, he used to promise X and deliver Y time and time again.
And what we've demonstrated since being in government is that we
stick to the plans that we have, and we get on with it.
So we've got every-
So what is the plan?
We've got every confidence-
What are you going to cut?
So the basic sort of proposition that-
Answer what you're going to cut
... the basic proposition you'd hear from, a first
response from a lot of
departments will be, "Oh, this will be very hard."
Now, in the past,
particularly with, dare I say, other parties in charge, they'd say,
"Oh, yes. Well, it probably is too hard," and, "Yes, we'll give you some extra
money, and everybody will be happy." And that is why we've ended
up with the big blowout in spending across the public sector and
the big blowout in hiring.
But we're different. And so the second question is, well, yes, I know it's going to
be hard, but how are you going to do it?
And that's the difference fundamentally between us and
your side of the house. And so we're determined to find those savings.
So yes, it's not easy. Of course it's not easy.
And, I'm sure Mr. Roche would-- well, no, he's
determined. And he's looking for every opportunity
to deliver better service and find productivity gains.
But, so we keep pushing and say, "Okay, so how are we going to do things
differently?" I think it is correct to say,
if we carry on exactly as we are,
and you cut our funding, we're going to not be able to do everything that we used
to do. And I think that's an obvious statement.
But of course, the obvious response to that is, well, actually, we can't carry on
doing things exactly as they are. We're going to have to think really
hard about how we're going to share services with this group or that group.
How we're going to restructure our systems to do things differently.
How we're going to use technology to do things differently.
And those are the fundamental discussions that each minister has
with each chief executive in each department.
And they're gritty conversations.
They're difficult conversations, but the ones that we need to do on behalf of all
New Zealanders.
Just have a sip. If we can move to Sir Brian, who I don't
think shuns away from hard things.
Yes.
So I know that he will
be addressing this, but how are you going to, as public service
commissioner, actually implement the reductions to
your own budget, plus do the additional work
that the government has asked you to do since you have been public service
commissioner?
I'll just work through that in the normal way.
It's no different to a household that's under cost pressure.
I've been told I-
Well, it is a little bit different to a household that's under cost pressure
because you're in charge of the entire public service of this country, so the
stakes are probably a bit higher.
I understand that on a daily basis.
I will do what I need to do to keep the commission
performing to the highest standards possible.
When and if I feel I can't do that, then I will have a grown-up
conversation with my minister, and we'll reach an agreement on what
gets traded. We are not at that point yet.
The comments that you've made are the comments that everyone makes when
they're told you've got less money.
The first instinct is, actually, this is inconvenient, and it's
hard. Yeah, I'm just being really transparent.
This is not going to be easy, but we have to do it because we
are living in an environment where what we're doing
is unsustainable. It's very clear it's
unsustainable, and I and the other chief executives want to take the
opportunity to reinvent the way we do our work.
And it's great that we've now got that opportunity through the mandate the
government's given us.
I just have a final line of questioning
for Sir Brian, if possible. The, Madam Chair, the
Public Service Commission undertook a review into
spending into Facebook advertising-
Yep
... around bargaining.
Yep.
That review, I understand, was completed in draft
form in April this year and
was provided
to the commission.
And I understand also that that review has cost
around $37,000.
Correct.
Where is that review?
And why has it cost so much money? And when will it be released
publicly?
It is near complete, and I apologize to the committee.
It's taken longer than we would've wanted, but the reason I
commissioned the review is I felt that there were lessons for us to learn,
and there have been, and there are. So we're working through that.
I hope to have it finalized in the next week.
Then it will go to the Auditor-General, and then it'll become public.
It's likely to cost more than $37,000, but it's a very
important principle, and I know that's a really hard story, but we set the
standard, and we have to maintain those.
So as I've said to the committee last time, I believe
those sorts of social media things are part of our operating environment, and I
want to make sure that we're getting it right.
And what lessons have you learned?
Well,
the main lesson is to proceed with caution. That's what we did.
We've never been cavalier on this point.
Irrespective of how people have interpreted it, I want an independent report
to give me
a clear objective
based on their judgment and evidence of what we could have done better.
Okay. Sup from Fran.
Thank you, Chair.
So who was actually responsible for
giving the order to have those ads?
Was it you or the then public services minister?
It was certainly not anything to do with the minister.
It was within the commission, so I am ultimately responsible and
accountable.
So it was you who made the decision to launch those ads?
I didn't say that.
I-
I said somebody in the commission, a member of my staff.
This is not a fault finding. I am not hunting my staff.
I'm, as an organization, saying, "What could we have learnt about this and
what could we do better?" I'm accountable for that.
So there was no direction from the Minister of Public Services at the time?
It was-
None whatsoever. It had nothing to do with the Beehive.
That was our decision.
Okay. Primary from Andy.
Yeah. It was an issue which we were exploring this morning,
and we've been exploring. We're doing an inquiry into the Fire and Emergency New
Zealand, and one of the components of that is the oversight of Fire and
Emergency by DIA. And what became apparent, in fact, we had that
explicitly said to us this morning by the Minister
of Internal Affairs, was that initially a lot of the
feedback that was given by the department to
the minister was essentially cut and paste from
FENZ. They hadn't really applied a lot of analysis at all to what was going
on, or scrutiny to what was going on.
And that obviously raises a question across the whole system.
We've got a lot of Crown agencies which are monitored by various government
agencies, is to how well that is done across the system and
whether it can be improved. Now, quite clearly DIA said, "Yes, we need to improve,"
but I'm asking that question now, not for DIA specifically, but across the system,
is how well are we doing the monitoring, or government departments and
ministries doing the monitoring of the agencies which report to them?
Well,
I'll make some introductory comments.
When we talk about fixing the basics,
in the public sector sense, this is one of those
core areas. The government,
across
many, many agencies, commission
projects
or services from
a wide range, whether it's in Justice
and
MSD and DIA, many of them. And
I don't think historically we've been
good enough generally, there's variations, some better than others,
at ensuring that we're getting the very best outcomes and benefit
for that investment.
Obviously, each entity, such as DIA in that case, is responsible
for that and is accountable for that, and that's what your
scrutiny process was about this morning and that's absolutely appropriate.
In terms of the overall
effectiveness, I think when we
are confronted with the task of finding the 5% plus 5%
savings in the next two years,
a big part of that, I think, is going to be essentially that very question,
how do we ensure that the contracts that we're making
are better scrutinized, better organized,
better
maintained,
and held to account? So very much part of what we
need to do.
That's good on contracts. Here I wasn't saying so much about the contracts, but
actually the monitoring of Crown agencies. So FENZ obviously is Crown agency.
We expect it to deliver some stuff.
Obviously.
But yeah.
Yes.
But yeah. So that was the issue I was particularly raising.
There's certainly room for improvement.
I think across the public sector,
a lot of these Crown entities, Crown agencies, actually deliver services directly
to the public. I think our monitoring regimes tend to be
backward-looking, and
often after the event, which is really unhelpful.
So we are doing quite a bit of work with Treasury on how we might
refresh the whole monitoring and relationship.
But there are challenges because there's always an asymmetry of information between
the entity and the monitor.
And that's partly the issue.
That's part of the issue, but the use of technology and stronger
relationships and more transparency, I think will help
significantly.
So just to finish that off, as you go through that
process of reviewing and improving that process-
Yeah
... how will we actually see that being, you will actually say it up in lights,
"This is what we're
now doing. This is what's changed, and this is how
we're going to hold these agencies better to account."
We haven't finished the work yet, so I can't answer that-
Yeah
... with the authority I would like.
But I do think that we have to get a better model.
Not all Crown entities are the same.
There's five or six of them which are very critical.
NZTA comes to mind, Health New Zealand.
The way we deal with them should be different to some smaller
thing.
That's fair.
And at the moment, I think we have a one size fits all. That is not useful.
So watch this space.
Okay.
But ultimately, the measure that really counts is the
outcomes that we're seeking as a government, whether it's-
Uh, um-
Yeah
... more immunizations or, more attendance at school, all those
basic things.
And so that's
what we're fundamentally looking for.
And in each instance, there's clarity about what we're wanting to achieve
and what we expect to get for the money invested.
And that's the most fundamental-
I think the point was that it was an agency which wasn't delivering.
Yeah.
Still isn't,
and hasn't been being held to account properly, and that's the issue.
Right. Can we move now to a primary from Tim? Thanks.
Oh, thank you, Chair. I
guess there's been a lot of discussion around
public service headcounts and,
heard from you the need to sort of drive productivity and efficiency as
part of where we're going. I just wanted to clarify, because in an earlier
question, someone referred to police officers.
So when we consider public service headcount, how many
police officers are included in that?
Well, police are-
Outside
... they're outside the police-
Police are outside. It doesn't include police officers.
So they're not part of that at all.
No.
They're completely separate.
Right.
How many nurses would be included in there?
Well, the nurses are outside it as well.
How many teachers?
They're outside.
What about Defense Force?
They're outside as well, isn't it?
Right. So all of those things, we have tens of thousands of people working for
the Crown-
Yes
... are actually not even part of this discussion, are they?
No.
Okay. So,
given we're talking predominantly about people that work in office buildings and
places like Wellington,
what is being done, though, because as part of this, you've said you do want to see
a reduced headcount. What is being done to lift
productivity and efficiency so that we're seeing good
outcomes despite an adjustment in the numbers?
Well, that's the primary goal of the
reforms that we're undertaking. And so,
when we talk about transforming the public service-
... it's about
delivering a public service that
delivers better value for money for New Zealanders, but also delivers better
services for New Zealanders. And that's the
goal because I think, as I said when I started talking about
the surveys indicating that out of 10 people are
satisfied with their most recent interaction with the public service.
So that's a good foundation.
But
expectations continue to rise. People expect things to be easier,
not harder.
And so, we want to deliver those better services.
What role does AI have in this space?
Well,
potentially significant. And
I think everybody and
people in their own household are sort of harnessing the
technology in various ways. But big
entities, particularly in the crunching of data and
information, whether it's
financial data or understanding
the behaviors of very large numbers of people and their
interactions, the ability of AI
to
better analyze that and use that information more effectively is
colossal. And so, that's a real opportunity for us.
So,
I think what we've set
is a
challenge to the sector. You used to be able to do it with X number of people,
and deliver good services in 2017.
Yes, we had a big blowout over six years.
Those numbers have grown substantially.
We now need to get it back to a more reasonable level.
And how are you going to do that? And
it's always easier to go up than it is to go down.
And so, that's where the big challenge lies, and that's what we're doing at the
moment.
There's a sup from Frank.
Thank you. Minister, are you
aware what risks has
emerged from the recent action of the Trump administration towards
Anthropic and stopping the state-of-the-art model Fable 5
from essentially continuing its public release?
What lessons have you learned from that?
Well,
the lessons that I learn are that-
Is that-
... state the obvious, one needs to be cautious in the development,
in the use of the very, very latest
technology.
I don't think we're sort of at that state at the moment.
We're several rungs back, and we need to...
I think we've got a real opportunity to get-
Just one second
... closer to the latest technology available to us.
So,
every advance in technology brings
significant benefits and also risks.
If you go back through history, that is demonstrably the case, and it
will be the case in the future.
And so, as you develop new opportunities,
you have to respond.
So every day we have discussions about,
in the context of the justice portfolio and the courts,
people,
ordinary New Zealanders, are using AI to come up
with
claims or self-representation,
delivering large volumes of material.
So, the people are using it, and the system needs to respond,
otherwise it will become overwhelmed and able to respond in an effective way.
So, I don't think there's an option of just saying, "Here's this new thing over
here. We don't need it. We're not going to engage with it.
We're just going to carry on as we were."
I don't think would be a sensible approach at all.
So will preference be given to local models as opposed to
overseas-based models in AI development in New Zealand?
Look, as a general rule,
we're an open trading country, and we don't typically
have special rules for local developers.
But we also- Obviously mindful of the fact that
locally developed things can, if they deliver the best outcome,
should be available to be used. But we don't sort of cut ourselves off as a small
country from the best global technology that's on offer,
thinking that we're going to create everything for ourselves.
So there's a combination, but yes, where it makes sense to use locally
developed things,
I'm sure each ministry will make those decisions on a sensible
basis.
Okay, I've got a sup from Ruben.
Thank you, Minister, for your answers so far on AI.
The ones around using
international tech primarily for AI
raises the question of who owns and controls the data, people's data,
that would be used to train, operate or improve those government AI
systems.
And what, if any, protections you think need to be put in place for that?
Well, yes, they are basic sort of questions, are
fundamental questions that every country is grappling with
at the moment. And
of course, in terms of the rules around
privacy and data
security,
we have many laws and rules in place currently,
and their effectiveness and appropriateness for the new technologies that are
coming through is something that's always
up for review. The question about
what some people talk about data sovereignty and
the ability to have
data physically in New Zealand
is one element of that, and we see some data centers being built and we are
hopeful through our general approach to getting things done
in this country with RMA reform and fast track and various other things,
we'll have the opportunity to do more of that.
There's a separate discussion around, but also having data centers with the
capability to do
generative AI,
and
again, physically within our borders, and that's an interesting discussion.
And
there's much to be considered in that space as well.
And so we're very alive to those issues and considering.
I don't know if there's anything you wanted to add on that.
No, not really, other than just to reinforce the point.
I think a lot of public administration systems are thinking through
very carefully what that means and what level of control they need to have and how
they might secure it.
Sure. So just to join a few things up.
At the beginning, you haven't
indicated that you've really made an assessment on
how AI adoption on public sector employment job reductions is going to come into
force. You
can't articulate to us a specific plan about how that's going to impact.
You've then also-
Well, I wouldn't characterize it that way.
That's your
Well, there were some pretty specific questions around that.
And-
It's your cynical reading of the situation, which is what you'd expect.
Accurately.
Well, cynical or otherwise, that's my reading of the situation.
Yes.
You then went on to talk about
the ability for AI to collate or draw on data
from multiple public service agencies.
So to be able to draw information from a number of sources.
And you've then in your most recent answer, talked about being hopeful
that there might be a system in place to make sure that's safe.
Do you think that's
appropriate?
Again-
Do you think people can feel confident with that?
Again, that's a very warped summary of the discussion.
What I would say is that we,
like every country in the world, is grappling with the
possibilities,
and also the natural risks that are
involved in the new technology that comes along.
And we're not putting our head in the sand and just thinking nothing will happen.
We're embracing those opportunities and we're very alive to, and
considering very carefully, the implications in terms
of data security,
and
privacy, and all those
related issues. But we're also mindful of the fact
that there are many problems right across the public
sector that continue to
bedevil us as a country,
in terms of getting better outcomes, in terms of
justice and
rehabilitation, and social security, a whole bunch of areas,
where getting access to timely information
is one of the core problems that we face.
So, we've got an opportunity here to do things better.
Okay. Final sup.
Sure. So then
if we trust you on that and it all pans out perfectly fine
and rolls out smoothly, who ultimately would be accountable
if an AI decision caused harm to a citizen?
Would that be the agency, the vendor, the official, or would it be the minister?
Well,
I'm not quite
sure what you're sort of talking about. Ultimately accountability for...
If you're suggesting that we're going to make AIs,
turn judges into AI creatures and their decisions will be one that
are responsible, that's not on the government agenda.
What typically
AI is being used for is to
gather and make use of data and
information, and to present that in a way that is more useful for
people rather than necessarily making decisions that
directly affect the lives of New Zealanders.
But,
again, the commissioner might have something to say on that.
Yeah, look, I don't think we're at the point that of the scenario you've got, but
basically if the person who made that decision would
retain the accountability. Ministers don't make many decisions, and
at that level, that tends to be a chief executive.
Okay, thank you. Primary from Frank.
Thank you, Chair. I want to turn to something mentioned at the start around
how you were going to meet
the target savings, and one of the ideas you raised was
mergers in government, department mergers, and consolidation of the public
sector more generally. I want to ask, Minister, at what stage are
ministries at with the potential merger proposals, and what stage is
your thinking about the scale for mergers?
Is every single agency on the table, are there some that are not,
definitely going to not be merged?
Would be useful to get some idea of your thinking, Minister.
Well,
certainly no decisions have been made, but
we're very alive to the possibility of doing things
differently. It's not sort of set in stone
why you should necessarily have 39 departments
and X number of Crown entities. They've grown up and
for historic reasons,
and other countries
cut the cake in different ways.
And so you would have heard the Prime Minister speak often
of other countries that seem to manage with a
smaller number of entities, and
Ireland and Singapore and
New South Wales and others spring to mind in that context.
And so, we're at the moment
working through different options, and
we'll have something to say about that in due course, but we haven't made any
decisions yet.
Are some-
I'd welcome
your suggestions and the suggestions of the committee.
Are some of the things you're looking at, for example, include looking at pulling
functions like HR, payroll, or IT fully from across the public
service into a more centralized model?
Are you focusing on scaling up mergers like that of GCSB and SIS?
And if it's the latter, can you give an example of the sort of agencies
that might have natural complementary-
Well, all of those things are being considered.
But I'm not going to
start speculating as to exactly which and what
would be a natural fit. I'm sure a lot of people can come up with their own
suggestions, but I don't think it'll be helpful for me just to start speculating
because I think it's better to go through it in a considered and
structured way. Because
there are real implications for the many thousands of people who are working in
those organizations.
So is there any agency that's not currently being considered as
part of a merger, as part of the future process, that you're sort of ruling out?
We haven't ruled anything in or out at the moment.
Okay.
Primary from Ruben.
Minister, this isn't the first time we've caught up this week on a number of
different portfolios.
Good to see you again.
It's great to see you again, and I'm sorry that you missed the soccer yesterday.
One of the questions I talked to you about earlier in the week, and it's as
relevant in this portfolio as any, and particularly given the
comments you've made about needing to have gritty and hard conversations with CEs,
is the
issue that we talked about where you've discussed
having
phone calls randomly where you'll put people on the spot
and
drill them for information or ask them questions.
But not keep any record notes, recordings of those
conversations. In the context of some of the issues we've talked about
today and the ramifications of some of the decisions that have been
made by these people, particularly in the area of significant job
losses, cost savings, and the rollout of AI,
is that a behavior that you think is sustainable?
Well,
we've got to operate in a
way that is
manageable. The member seems to think that on a Saturday afternoon when
I'm walking my dog,
and I'm talking to a chairperson about what's going on
in the sector, I should have a notebook beside me and be scribbling away, while I
do it, and I just don't. And
he can criticize me and if
the people of New Zealand bless him with the opportunity to do the same job, I'll
be interested to see how assiduous he is in
terms of writing down every conversation, and every thought
that he's had, because technically that could be available as well.
So I don't-- I do what is practical.
And so what we try and achieve and what we're clear about and
open about in government is our decision-making,
our cabinet papers, and all the material that
leads to that so that people can have a good, clear idea
about the rationale and the logic and the advice that we've received, and
I think that's
reasonable.
And do you got a sup, Ruben? No. Frank's got a sup. All right.
Minister, are you aware that the Public Service Commission has a mandate to ensure
good record keeping across the public service and has issued guidance through the
code of conduct for the public service, and information gathered in public
trust guidance? Are you confident you've complied with the same standards
that the Public Service Commission has issued for its employees?
Yes, I do my best.
You do your best, but are you confident that if a public servant were to do what
you do, that they would not get in trouble with their employer?
Well, I can't speak for every employer and what their expectations
are. And so,
I think you'll find
that
if you were to talk to-- The free flow of information and
frank and honest conversations, regular conversations and information gathering,
when
I'm talking to my chief executives on a regular
basis and I'm asking them,
"What's going on in the sector? What have you heard?"
I don't think I necessarily need to be writing down everything, and
it's just a waste of time.
So just to be explicit, you'd be comfortable for chief executives
to be having Off the record, off light calls with any CRAN
boards that they might report to and not take any notes or minutes from that.
Oh, look, it's for chief executives to follow the
appropriate rules, and I expect them to follow the appropriate rules.
Is it you, Andy, for the primary?
Yeah, look, I just have one question.
Are we the same as the last two, which were identical, or are we going to...
This is a primary from Andy.
Oh, okay.
Sorry.
Oh, just we're repeating the same questions over this side.
Oh, well, I'm going to ask the same question, so don't worry about that.
Oh, okay.
Can we move on because I'm running out of time?
Just a question. Obviously, this is very, very immediate current.
So the situation which we heard announced yesterday,
in terms of the
MB, the
information technology
system such as it is, that was theoretically being developed.
The inquiry that you are looking into, it looks as though it's very much
focused on cultural side of things,
and what's gone on there.
Are there any sort of,
without prejudicing the inquiry, any particular things that you are...
When you see what's happened, that you are concerned about across the system as a
whole, or you think this is just an isolated situation where
obviously something went badly awry, and people obviously thought it was okay to do
something badly awry?
You might want to try.
I think it's
an isolated incident, but it has occurred. We've had a report.
That report raised a number of issues.
I felt
we needed to undertake an investigation.
That investigation is under with my statutory powers, which gives
it certain standing. I think that's important.
We need to get the evidence to determine the substance of the
issues raised, and I want to do that as quickly as possible
because this has raised doubts
across the public sector about whether we're capable of being relied upon.
As I've said publicly, it's an intolerable position when our integrity is
questioned and when confidence and trust cannot be given.
So we have a task ahead. I feel really confident that we can
get there, but I can't just whitewash this away and go,
"Oh, like it didn't happen." So let's get the evidence, and let's work out
what next for us.
Certainly, ministers are taking the whole situation extremely seriously.
Yeah.
And we're certainly not at all content with
the example,
and we want to get a thorough review of it to
make sure that we've learnt all the lessons that we need to, that people are held
accountable,
and
that we have a broader sense of things.
Exactly.
And in that conversation or that piece of work,
the point that you made, Brian, about the integrity and the people's trust
and confidence in the public sector as a whole,
there are some things in this process that you hope will give people
assurance around that.
Yeah. I
believe people have that assurance now, but we've now had a blemish, which has
given rise to a question.
Yes.
We have to answer it as soon as we can.
I hope to have the terms of reference and the person or
people who are going to do the review announced in the next few days, which should
give people confidence.
A couple of subs, one from Fran.
Yeah. I've got a couple of questions around the remit of the review,
Sir Raj. The first is, is it in the limit of your
statutory powers to be able to lay criminal charges at the end of the review?
Is that a potential outcome from this?
The second is, are you also examining at which
stage ministers were told information that they could have
potentially done more, or is it purely around
what the public servants could have done better?
Or are you also looking at the potential for ministerial responsibility here?
The focus is to address the issues that have been raised in the
report.
I'm not going to constrain it at this point.
I think we should actually just see what comes out.
But it's no secret within the public sector that this
project had been in a level of complexity and
distress. There have been two previous ministers who had
significant concerns. So when you read that
people have been manipulating rules and been
altogether too cute on the exercise of judgment, that's completely
unacceptable. It is not the way the public service in New Zealand
operates, and we have to hold people to account.
Rupert.
There are a number of other major IT changes underway at the
moment. Ministry of Social Development or
Mm-hmm.
So given the context of a review
happening over there, what are you doing immediately to address those other
projects in train? What controls have you got in place there?
I'm just working through that with...
This was a complicated IT project.
We have a number of complicated IT projects.
This had warning signs I need to systemize why weren't they
acted on. And so once again, I don't want to sort
of overreact, but nor do I want to look like it's
okay. It's not okay. So we will learn from
this mistake, and we will make sure that it is
not repeated.
So will you be making adjustments to the governance or
controls you've got in place over the other projects?
I would think so, but we haven't done the work yet, and I don't want to get
ahead of the work. But there's no point, as it were,
having these experiences and not learning from them.
We need to learn from them, and we need to implement
it across the whole of the public sector so that we can avoid this
happening again.
Okay, and Ruben, you've got a primary.
I do, yes.
This is sort of around pay equity and
how it's accounted for for each public sector
area.
So whether that's baselines or budget allowances, is there a
specific line item for
particular areas?
I might just turn to- I might just Turn, might just give details of
that.
So each... Morning. Afternoon, sorry.
Each agency is responsible for their own
pay equity claims when they come in.
And looking at that, there is some provision that Treasury makes for
funding where that is necessary. But primarily, it's covered by each
agency's baseline.
Thank you.
Fran?
But I would just say on the pay equity, of course, this government made
changes to the legislation, which were opposed by other parties.
And
if that was to be unwound, the consequences run to
many, many billions of dollars. And so,
an honest conversation needs to be had about how that's going to be funded.
Fran.
Is this mic primary?
Yes.
I'm curious about the new hat you're wearing, Mr. Roche.
Sorry, Sir Roche, around the-
... Government Digital Delivery Agency.
Yeah.
Is it intended that your chief executive role there is permanent, or are you going
to be looking for a replacement?
At some point when, and I think this is a matter of public record,
when GCDO
came to Public Service Commission, I just wanted to have an independent
review that is near completion. When it's done, I'll
consider the management and leadership roles going forward.
I'm not there yet.
Right. And can you
elaborate on what role the
GD, GC-
GDDA
... GDDA will play in that digital transformation plan?
What sort of things will it do?
It will be the system leader.
And the system needs that. Interestingly enough,
the mandate for GDDA was changed by Cabinet, so it's
got more force. The system itself, the chief
executives are looking for leadership in this matter.
So actually, it's a great opportunity for us to do things better,
be more efficient, save money, and get better quality outcomes.
Okay.
Very good.
I don't have anybody else on my list, so I think that brings us to the
end.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Okay.